[Music]
very good morning to you welcome to
breakfast with chris mason and louise
minchin
our headlines today more signs of
intense pressure on the nhs as cases of
coronavirus continue to rise
three ambulance trusts in the south east
of england urge people to only call 999
if there's a genuine emergency it comes
as hopes grow that the oxford
astrazeneca vaccine will be given
uk approval this week getting ready for
brexit
a government warning to check your
passport travel insurance and mobile
roaming charges
before traveling to the eu the end for
free
refills sugary drinks are the latest
target in the government's obesity
clampdown
good morning in sport she's the most
successful female jump jockey of all
time i'll be talking to bryony frost
after her historic win in the king
george vi chase
on boxing day good morning more of us
waking up to the first snow of the
season this morning it's frosty
it's icy it's going to be a cold end to
2020.
i've got your forecast on the way
[Music]
good morning eight o'clock monday the
28th of december our top story
hospitals across the uk say they're
facing intense pressure as the number of
coronavirus infections
continues to rise three ambulance trusts
in the south of england are urging
people to only call 999
if there's a genuine emergency london
ambulance service says
boxing day was one of the busiest 24
hours in its history and in scotland
doctors say health services could be
overwhelmed if the relaxation of
coverage restrictions for christmas
triggers a surge in cases andy moore
reports
health services across the country are
under pressure and in some areas such as
wales and london
they're under particular strain the
capital is where the new variant of
coronavirus is growing most rapidly
the london ambulance service has
reported that boxing day
was one of its busiest days ever second
only to march the 16th earlier this year
when the first wave of the pandemic was
beginning to surge
on the 26th of december this year the
service dealt with 7918 emergency calls
that's an increase of more than 50
percent on last year's total for the
same day
of 5217.
in order to meet the rising demand the
service is putting back office staff on
the road
and drafting in extra ambulances from
neighbouring regions
other ambulance services in the south
east are reporting similar problems
ambulance trusts in particular are
coming under extreme pressure
as our community and mental health
services
everybody affected by the impact of
covid
and talking to trust leaders overnight
they are
under no illusion about how challenging
this is in wales more than half of
intensive care beds
are now occupied by covered patients
it's a situation described
as unprecedented the situation across
wales is quite sobering
and the number of people that are
presenting with symptoms of covid
that not only require hospital admission
but are so seriously ill that they
require intensive care
and that's our more than 50 percent of
our bed occupancy
in intensive care is now due to covic
patients is
very worrying in scotland the country's
clinical director has denied the system
could be overwhelmed
he said measures were in place where
extra capacity was needed
but some doctors are warning that a
combination of factors could create a
perfect storm
the combination of these two occurrences
with
much more mixing over christmas and the
very high transmissibility of the new
strain of covid
would result in many more infections
and therefore many more hospital
admissions
and necessarily then more admissions to
intensive care unit and
more deaths sadly but there is some good
news on the horizon
another vaccine the oxford university
astrazeneca version
is expected to be given approval soon by
the regulator
and its rollout could start early in the
new year the uk has ordered 100 million
doses of this jab
and unlike the pfizer vaccine it doesn't
need to be kept at extremely low
temperatures
andy moore bbc news well meanwhile
countries across the european union have
begun
mass coronavirus vaccinations with many
prioritizing
the elderly and health workers 100 101
year old
gertrude heeze was the first person to
get it in germany
while three health workers were the
first to receive the vaccine in rome
the president of the eu commission
ursula vonderline
said she hoped the 27 country block
would be able to vaccinate
everyone in europe by the end of 2021
businesses and people traveling to the
european union are being warned to get
ready
for substantial changes from new year's
eve the cabinet office minister michael
gove said there would be some disruption
which everyone needs to prepare for
as the brexit transition period comes to
an end here's our political
correspondent helen kat
[Music]
this was the moment the uk left the eu
11 pm on the 31st of january this year
and it'll be 11 pm again this time on
the 31st of december when we will leave
the single market
and the customs union too this time the
government says
we will notice the change a trade deal
was finalized in brussels last week and
it is expected to be in place before
thursday the eu is set to approve it
possibly as early as today
the uk parliament is expected to pass
the necessary law on wednesday
but even with the deal in place
businesses which trade goods with the eu
will still have to file customs
declarations
even though they won't pay any tariffs
lorries wanting to use the channel
tunnel or the port of dover will need a
permit to enter kent
in hollyhead authorities are also
putting in place measures to deal with
possible traffic buildup
there'll be new trade rules for northern
ireland the government has said there is
likely to be some disruption to trade
it has advice for anyone planning a trip
to any eu country except ireland too
check your passport is valid double
check your roaming policy for your
mobile phone
and take out full travel insurance valid
e-hit cards will still be recognised
though
the government says with big change
comes challenge
and opportunity and that it's reminding
us starts in just a few days time
helen katt bbc news will be speaking to
michael gove here in about 20 minutes
time half past eight
uh buy one get one free promotions on
unhealthy food and free
refills of sugary soft drinks in
restaurants will be banned in england
from april
2022 as part of new government plans to
tackle obesity
supermarkets will also be barred from
displaying unhealthy goods
at checkouts as aruna ayengar reports
ministers want us to buy more of this
and less of this
loading up the trolley with unhealthy
buy one get one freeze
may soon be a thing of the past
ministers say this promotional practice
is bad for our health
and encourages us to buy excessive
amounts of food we don't actually need
the government says it wants to get
tough on tackling obesity
and childhood obesity is seen as one of
the biggest threats to britain's future
health
the restrictions will apply to foods
high in fat salt or sugar
such as cakes crisps soft drinks
breakfast cereals pizzas
and ready meals smaller shops will be
exempt from the rules
and there will be no more free refills
of sugary soft drinks when dining out
succulent tower burger smothered in
spicy an eight-week consultation will
also propose going ahead with a ban on
junk food adverts
being aired on tv before 9 pm
the approach which will apply in england
is seen as a u-turn for boris johnson
who has in the past criticized so-called
sin taxes
and nannying by the state aruna ayenga
bbc news
hundreds of british tourists have
reportedly fled the swiss
at the swiss ski resort of verbier
rather than face a 10-day quarantine
around 200 people are thought to have
left the town popular with uk
holidaymakers
during the night that was after
switzerland's government ordered anyone
arriving from the uk after december the
14th
to self-isolate following the discovery
of the new variants of coronavirus
reports claim tourists were even offered
free champagne on christmas day
to make their stay more comfortable
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full story with bbc dot co dot uk
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with bbc news